Myanmar Text (A 39 lines, B 34, lines) tr. Charles Duroiselle (1919)
rev. Tun Aung Chain
Prosperity! Honour to the Buddha! One thousand six hundred and
twenty-eight years of the Buddha's religion having elapsed, Úri
Tribhuvanadityâdhammarâj became king in this city of Arimaddanapur. A
beloved wife of that king was named Trilokavatamsakâdevî, and that beloved
wife's son was named Râjakumâr. That king gave the beloved wife three
villages of slaves. That beloved wife having died, the king gave her
ornaments and the three villages of slaves to her son named Rajakumâr. At
the time that that king having reigned twenty-eight years, became sick even
unto death that son of the beloved wife, who was named Râjakumâr, calling
to mind the favours of the great king who had nurtured him, made an image
of the Buddha all in gold. At the time he offered (it) he spoke thus: "I, your
slave, made this golden Buddha for my lord; the three villages of slaves which
my lord gave me, I give to this golden Buddha." At that time the king, being
delighted, said: "Good, Good!" and, in the presence of the great monk
Mahather, the great monk Muggaliputtatissatther, the great monk Sumedha
the learned, the great monk Brahmapal, the great monk Brahmadiv, the great
monk Son and the great monk Sanghasena the very learned, the king poured
water. That being done, that son of the beloved wife who was named
Rajakumâr enshrined that golden Buddha, and made this cave-pagoda with a
golden spire. Having finished (it), at the time he dedicated this cave-pagoda
and Buddha, he brought up (the folk of) Sakmunalon, one village, Rapây, one
village, Henbuiw, one village, these three villages of slaves. That son of the
beloved wife, who was named Râjakumâr, poured water for this cave -
pagoda and Buddha, and thus said: “Let this deed of mine be the cause of my
obtaining Omniscience! After me, (whosoever) whether (he be) my son, or

grandson, or relative, or any other person, if he oppresses the slaves I have
offered to this Buddha, may he not behold the Buddha Arimittiyâ!"

Mon Text (A 33 lines B 46 lines) tr. C.O.Blagden (1919)
rev. Tun Aung Chain
Prosperity! Honour to Buddha! Prosperity! After the religion of the
Lord Buddha had gone on for one thousand six hundred and twenty-eight
years, in this city of Arimaddanapur King Sri Tribhuvanadityadhammarâj was
(king); one queen of that king was named Trilokavatamsakadevi; that queen's
son was named Rajakumâr. The king gave three villages of slaves to the
queen. When the queen died, the king gave all the queen's goods, together
with the three villages of slaves, to the queen's son, who was named Râjakumâr.
After the king had reigned for twenty-eight years, when the king was
sick well-nigh unto death, the queen's son, who was named Râjakumâr,
remembering the favours wherewith the king had nourished him made a golden
Buddha (and) went (and) offered it to the king, (and) addressed (him) thus:
"This golden Buddha (have) I made to assist my lord. The three villages of
slaves that my lord gave to me I am giving to this Buddha: may my lord.
approve!"
Then the king being well pleased, expressed approval, (saying), "Well
done! Well done!" Then (in the presence of) our lord the Mhather the lord
teacher Muggaliputtarissa ther, the lord teacher the learned Sumedha, the
lord teacher Brahmapal, the lord teacher Brahmadiv, the lord teacher Son,
(and) the lord teacher the very learned Sanghasena, in the presence of those
lords the king poured water onto the ground.
After this, the queen's son, who was named Rajakumar, took the golden
Buddha (and) enshrined it (and) made this golden-spired cave-pagoda. When
dedicating this Buddha (and) cave-pagoda, the queen's son brought up (the
men of) Sakmunalon, one village, Rapây, one village, Ñahhgir u(y) one
village, all those three village-communities of slaves, (and) poured out water
for the golden Buddha that he (had) enshrined in this cave-pagoda, (and)
prayed thus: "May this act of mine be a cause for the attainment (by me) of
Omniscience! Be it my child be it my grandchild, be it my kinsman, be it (any)
other person, if he do violence to the slaves whom I am giving to this
Buddha, may he not get sight of the exalted Buddha Mettey!"

Pyu Text (A 26 lines B 29 lines)
rev. Tun Aung Chain
tr. C.O.Blagden (1911)
ligion of the
twenty-eight
ammarâj was
that queen's
slaves to the
ods, together
d Rajakumâr.
the king was
. Râjakumâr,
nade a golden
d (him) thus:
ee villages of
may my lord
aying), "Well
ither the lord
Sumedha, the
teacher Son,
ence of those
ok the golden
agoda. When
ought up (the
gir u(y) one
red out water
agoda, (and)
nt (by me) of
an, be it (any)
giving to this
(Note: This translation is tentative, being to a great extent based not so much
on the obscure original as on the more intelligible Burmese and Mon versions).
Prosperity! 1628 years after death of the Dathagada in this city called
Rimadhanabu Sri Tribhuvanadityadhamaraja so-called was lord, his queen
consort was called Trilogavadasagâdevi, her son was called Râjagumâ (The
king) gave her three villages of slaves. When the queen had died, (he) gave
the queen's goods (and) the three villages of slaves to the queen's son
Râjagumâ.
—
When the king had reigned for twenty-eight years, (and) was sick
nigh unto death, the queen's son named Râjagumâ, [being mindful of the
benefits wherewith the king had nourished him,] caused this golden image in
the likeness of the Budha to be made, (and) brought this Budha into the
(royal) presence (and) spake thus: "This golden Budha which I have made
on my lord's behalf I present to my lord. The three villages of slaves (that)
my lord gave me I give to this sacred image of gold." Thereupon the king
was delighted (and) exclaimed, “Well done! Well done!". Then (in the
presence of) my lord Mahather, my lord Mugalubudadisathe, my lord the
learned Sumedha, my lord Vrahmaba my lord Vradeyo, my lord Su, my lord
the very learned Sagasi, in the presence of these lords of the church the king
poured water (onto the ground).
That having been done, the queen's son named Râjagumâ enshrined
the golden Budha, (and) having made the golden spire of the cave-pagoda,
pronounced the dedication of this cave-pagoda (and) having assembled (the
men of) Samanalo, one village, Rabai, one village, (and) (J)ivu one village,
these three villages of slaves, the queen's son Râjagumâ, having poured out
water to this cave-pagoda (and) Budha, spake thus: "May this that I am
doing be a cause for giving me Omniscience (and) wisdom! As for these
slaves, be it my son, be it my grandson, be it my kinsman, be it any other
person, [if he shall do violence to those that I have dedicated to this Budha,
may he never be permitted to approach the presence of] the lord Budha
Arimedeya!"

Pali Text (A 41 lines, B 40, lines) tr. Charles Duroiselle (1919)
Prosperity! Having bowed to the Buddha and other (two) Excellent
Objects, I shall relate the noble work of merit performed, in the Conqueror's
dispensation, by Râjakumâra. Hearken to me! When one thousand six
hundred and twenty-eight years had elapsed after the Nibbana of the Lord of
the World, Tibhuvanadicca, a powerful king and scion of the exalted solar
race, became king in the city called Arimaddana. He had a beloved queen,
Tilokavatamsikâ (by name), who was benevolent and skilful in all the affairs
of the king. She had a son, Râjakumâra by name, a minister, zealous in (the
management of) the affairs of state, prudent and wise. The king, graciously
disposed towards the queen, gave her three villages for her to enjoy, for life,
the revenues (accruing from) the slaves (thereof). Now, upon the death of
the queen, the king again made those three villages over to Rajakumâra. On
the king, after having ruled righteously for twenty-eight years, being seized
with a mortal illness he (Rajakumâra), remembering the numerous and great
favours of the righteous king, had a beautiful image of the Buddha made all in
gold and, carrying it with great pomp, and well pleased (with his meritorious
act), approached unto the presence of the king and told him of his intention:
"On your Majesty's behalf, I have made this beautiful golden image
of the Master; deign, my lord, to rejoice in this excellent work of
merit! The three villages which you formerly gave me, I have
dedicated to this image; at this also rejoice!"
On this being said, the king, (though) his mind was troubled by
disease, rejoiced and, pleased and delighted, exclaimed; "Good! good!" The
compassionate Mahathera, the thera Muggaliputtaka, Sumedha the wise, so
called on account of his wisdom, Brahmapala, likewise Brahmadeva the
virtuous, Sona, the learned and eminent scholar called Sanghasena:, in the
presence of these monks (the king), well pleased, poured the libation on the
ground, taking the earth to witness. Then, the minister enshrined the
beautiful golden image and built (over it) a cave-pagoda surmounted by a
golden spire. Having performed the dedication ceremony for the Buddha-
image and the cave-pagoda, he (Rajakumâra), weary of repeated birth, made
the following aspiration:
"May this meritorious work, performed and accumulated by me,
be the cause of my attaining Ommicience! Whosoever, be he my
son, or grandson, or any other relative, with evil intent and
unbelieving mind should oppress those slaves, dwellers in the three
villages, whom I have dedicated to the cave-pagoda and the golden
image of the Great Sage, may this vile person be precluded from
beholding Metteyya, the Chief of men!"
