Reverence to the Buddha, whose pure mind
Made for the earth a Sun-his noble Law,
That all three worlds may follow him and reach
Salvation, who were powerless else to cross
The jungle and slough of sensuality.
To the sole Lord I bow, His Law, His Church.
Auspicious cycle of our world, adorned
By Buddhas five! Four Buddhas have arisen,
The Home of endless pity then achieved
Born as Vessantara he sought delight
In doing good to men and aye excelled
In all the Ten Perfections; passing thence
The Eye-endowed was born in Tusita,
That city where in beauty and the Ten
Who from the myriad universes came
The Paragon his observations five
In Sakiyan line. For thirty years save one
In home he dwelt, the Lord of glory; thence
He went a monk, resolved. In his desire
For highest wisdom he put forth his strength
In hard ascetic practices; he sate,
And by the high prepared path he passed
Toward wisdom's centre; there the factors four
Nor trembled, fearless as a lion maned,
He brake, affrighting them; victorious, calm
And rapt in contemplation all that night's
The lore of former births and sights occult;
Then comprehended, in the latest watch,
Inspired, the Light-giver, all duties done.
All fever cooled, and free from poison-drugs,
There was a king most wise, the lord of men,
Who loved the hearing of good Law; his name
This just and righteous ruler of the land
So truly wise with best intelligence
He ordered: "Make a pleasing lovely room,
A fragrant chamber for the mighty sage
And images of spirits." This great king
An image glorious-wonderful and fair
Might never wink,—so purely wise was he.
He copied; clad the monks with many a set
What time the gu was dedicated, fain
He fed them, cheerfully; then cried aloud
In strong desire for Buddhahood this prayer :-
This Conqueror, having plumbed the deeps of
And reached omniscience, durst not publish it
Indued with valour beyond weight!-and came:
A space of thirty yojanas, by road
To sweet Isipatana, the resort
He taught the turning of the wheel of Law,
And brahmas and immortals, all that host.
With the elder Aññakondañña he caused
To reach Nirvana, matchless path.-So I
The working of twin miracles he knew
And dealt in divers magic meet for Lords;
For from the Master's body forth there came
And dazzling rays, six coloured rays that ran
He saw and pitying brought them from all worlds
To Mt. Mèru, and ranging in one row
By magic power upon their heads he built
A jewelled path where to and fro he walked
Thereafter to the seat of Thirty Three
And gave ambrosial liquor to the hosts
So would I teach that Law inscrutable.
There on the summit of Sinèru stood
In pomp the Buddha and by power divine
Do marvels and fling open wide the world.
He taught the creatures of our earth the Law
In divers ways; by matchless Law he tamed
Who thought 'We are the Buddhas.'-So would I.
In virtue sure as earth, in fixity
As Himava, in wisdom as the heaven,
All doubt emerging, all his karma done,
By death of all his elements set free.
He tameth others, for himself is tamed;
He calmeth others, for himself is calm;
Hero without a home!-Would I were he!
In wisdom, sole. dispeller of the dark;
The poisons, lust and hate and misconceit.
Hero incomparable!—Would I were he!
As when a fisherman with subtil net
So many heretics, ill-doers, who leapt
Into the shoal of heresy beguiled
Crows and all winged fowl which cross the sky
All things both conscious and unconscious passed
The world of spirits and our world had leapt
To night and error; but that wisdom shone
And night is scattered. As the rising sun
Tamer of men, by men and spirits adored.-
Would I were such a Buddha, Charioteer,
Tamer of men, by men and spirits adored.
By this my gift, whatever boon I seek,
By this abundant merit I desire
And splendours of a monarch; nay, not even
To be the pupil of the Conqueror.
The river of Samsara, and all folk
Would speed across thereby until they reach
The Blessed City. I myself would cross
And drag the drowning over. Ay, myself
Would hatred calm. The three immoral states,
Greed, hate, delusion, rooted all in self,
O may they die, whenever born in me!
Nor yield to fire nor robbers, life by life.
Longings of sense for all delicious things,
May sense of shame, fear of reproach (declared
By the Sun's kinsman Guardians of the world)
All worldly wealth forsaking draw me near
I would fulfil hereafter, great and small,
Borne through the element the spotless moon
So I delighting in the Master's lore,
Would shine among disciples. I would know
The Master's mind, his ninefold doctrine fraught
I would do good to others and myself.
What the Great Sage forbids I would not do.
May I be alway conscious and aware
I would put forth mine energies and save
By merit of this act I would behold
Enhaloed on a rainbow pathway fair
There might I hear good Law, and bending low
And all his monks, till clad in virtues eight,
Informed by such a Teacher, I become
A Buddha in the eyes of spirits and men.
Tathagata by men and spirits adored
Would shine and be by men and spirits adored.
The twenty four infinities he saved
The fourscore and four thousand points of Law
For good of all hereafter, blazed abroad
Niccasa a ca n sento b l nam avij Set forth the transience of conditioned things
Wrecking the notion of dull fools who deemed
All things are stable,' and at last attained
The city of Nirvana, safe retreat
That city lavish of abounding bliss!"
This is the stone inscription of the king
The elements of wisdom, the Three Gems
On Sunday the fourth waxing of Kason
In the five hundred and third year to build
At an auspicious moment. That same year
On Thursday eleventh waning of Nadaw
